Gameplay

Each game is played by a single contestant, who earns money incrementally, based on a payout ladder, by answering simple trivia questions, with the game themed as a school quiz. The following description of the show, is based primarily on the U.S. version, of Are You Smarter than a 5th Grader?, though the general format applies to all international versions.

The game relies on the premise, that an adult would not know the information, generally, taught in elementary grade school, because it is rarely used in adult life, by the type of person chosen to be a contestant.[2] Therefore, the show is essentially a test to see how much an adult has retained since graduating elementary school. The show also derives its humor by occasionally displaying the contestant's educational attainment, implying that in spite of that, they struggle to answer some questions.

The contestant is presented and chooses from a set of subjects and grade level question topics in any order they like, usually ten in most versions, with one or two subjects for each grade level. Each question is presented as either a multiple choice question of three answers, a true-or-false question, or a short-answered question, in which a contestant must answer it correctly in order to progress on to the next question. Throughout the game, the contestant can choose to "drop out of school" and leave with the current accumulated winnings won up to that point. If the contestant gets it incorrect, unless the student has the correct answer via a "Save" (see below), he or she "flunk out" and the contestant leaves the game either with nothing or the amount of money from the last threshold level they passed (in the Taiwanese version, the contestant's winnings are cut by half instead, as the version neither have a guaranteed sum not have an option to leave the game).

During the game, the contestant also chooses one of the five students from the classroom who will assist the contestant on two questions. The contestant is also presented with two "cheats" and a "save" that may only be used once throughout a game to help them on their way:

Peek: The contestant is shown their classmate's answer, and may use it or give a different one. When this cheat is used, the contestant may not "drop out" on the current question.
Copy: The contestant is locked into using their classmate's answer, without being able to see it first. The classmate must provide the correct answer in order for the contestant to advance to the next stage; otherwise, the contestant flunks out. When this cheat is used in the 2015 revival, the classmate is allowed to discuss his/her answer with the other fifth graders and change it if desired.
Save: If the contestant misses a question and the classmate has answered correctly, the contestant is credited with a correct answer and allowed to continue in the game. The contestant cannot choose to use the Save; it is automatically deployed on their first miss. If the classmate has also missed the question, the contestant flunks out. By using the Peek first, a contestant could have two possible answers to a question – their own, then the classmate's with the Save if needed.
Once all three forms of assistance are used or the tenth question is answered correctly, whichever comes first, the classmates must return to the tables and take no further active role in the game.

Each correct answer moves the contestant up a payout ladder (the question value determines the difficulty, regardless of grade level), and by completing the first set of ten questions the contestant is offered a final, bonus question worth the grand prize from the highest primary school grade level (for example, fifth-grade in the American version or sixth-grade in the 2015 revival). The subject is given to the contestant but not the question, then a decision must be made either by ending the game or risking their winnings and continue playing. Once the contestant decides to go on, the question is then presented and they must answer it. They can't "drop out" or receive any assistance from the classmates. A correct answer wins the contestant the grand prize that varies from country to country. At the end of the game, the contestant must confess to the camera whether they are "smarter than a 5th grader", based on whether they have won the grand prize.